Maybe we should get started, right? Uh
hi everyone. Uh it's a pleasure to
welcome you all uh to to tonight's talk
with Professor Arvin Narayan. The
Schwarzman College of Computing is
honored to co-host uh this event with uh
MIT's shaping the future of work
initiative. Uh we're excited to uh have
this uh unique convergence of minds and
missions at the intersection of
technology, society, and future of work.
We're honored to be joined by uh
professor Arvin Naranan from Princeton
uh also the author of the book AI snake
oil at such a critical time when there's
so much debate and discussion around the
promise and peril of AI with many people
focusing on existential risk. Um Arvin
and Sasha's book uh brings a breath of
fresh air and provides a balanced
perspective on how we can navigate the
hype and reality of AI. I personally
recommend this book to everyone. Uh
Arvin in the book draws a parallel a
very effective parallel with snake oil
uh whose sellers uh promise miracle
cures with false pretenses sometimes
ineffective but harmless but in other
cases harms extending to uh loss of
health or life very similar to AI. Uh AI
snake oil is AI that does not and cannot
work. And the goal of the book is to
identify AI snake oil and to distinguish
it from uh places where AI can work very
effectively especially in high stakes
settings such as hiring, healthcare and
justice. I'm thrilled to represent the
Schwarzman College of Computing as the
deputy dean of academics and our dean
Dan Hutton locker is also here with us
tonight and it's truly a pleasure to be
here with the dynamic leaders uh of the
shaping the future of work initiative
Donna Samloo and uh David Otter uh
Simon's not here Simon's not here and
also an effective leader dynamic leader
Simon Johnson who couldn't join us today
uh shaping the future of work brings an
evidence-based lens to economic and
policy impacts of automation and the
Schwarzman College is reimagining how we
do research and teach computing with
social implications at our core. What
unites these efforts and why we're so
excited to have Arvin here tonight is a
shared commitment to clarity, rigor, and
technical expertise in how AI technology
is developed and deployed. Tonight's
presentation and conversation promises
to enlighten us, make us think about
these important issues. And with that,
please join me in welcoming uh professor
Daron Samoglu from the department of
economics institute professor and
faculty co-director of shaping the
future of work initiative. Thank you as
I don't need that. I have the lapel mic.
Thank you.
Uh thank you very
much. Thank you and thank you for
everybody before being here. This is a
uh great event and I'm delighted that
people have recognized it as a great
event and filled the filled filled it
here.
Uh I want to say just uh two more words
about the initiative for shaping the
future of work which is co-led by myself
David Otter and Simon Johnson who
unfortunately couldn't be here. And part
of the reason why I want to say that is
because I want to emphasize how
synergistic Arvin's agenda is to what we
want to do. We've uh launched this
initiative because we're worried about
the future of work, the future of
inequality, the future of
productivity in the age of digital
technologies and AI. And part of the
reason we are concerned is precisely
about how AI and other technologies are
going to be used. And the perspective as
the word shaping suggests is one in
which we argue that the future of these
technologies is not given is not
pre-ordained but different technologies
have different consequences and we want
to understand those consequences and we
want to steer technology via a variety
of channels mostly coming from the
academic research we're doing and we're
our our collaborators are doing and our
affiliates are doing towards the more
socially beneficial directions and I
think I cannot imagine somebody better
than Arvin to actually uh sort of give
much greater depth and breadth to this
because Arvin a professor of economics
at uh at Princet of computer science
although we could we could have you as a
professor of economics as well Arvin I
think I think it's it's fair game uh
professor of computer science at
Princeton and the director of the center
for information technology and policy is
bringing even without the book a unique
perspective great techn technical
expertise but a very clearey eyed and
dep deep understanding of many
applications of AI and that is exactly
the space where we need to be not
excessive optimism not excessive
pessimism but understand what are the
things that AI can do productively what
are the things it cannot do at the
moment perhaps never and what are the
things that it can do but are not going
to be great so Arvin's book uh AI snake
oil which you're going to hear about is
full of amazing insight sites uh ranging
from predictive AI to generative AI,
large language models to social media to
machine learning and the mistakes you
can make with machine learning. Uh I
think we're going to get a glimpse of
many of these uh excellent points and
hopefully a lot of food for thought for
everybody. Arvin's going to speak for 20
25 minutes and then we're going to have
a little bit of a conversation for 15
minutes or so and then we're going to
open it up for Q&A. So, please give a
warm welcome to Arvin and we're really
delighted to have him
[Applause]
here. Hello everybody. Thank you Daron
and Au for such kind words. It's really
my pleasure to be here today and I
really mean it because the origin story
of this book is actually right here at
MIT. So, let me tell you how that
happened. This was way back in 2019 when
I kept seeing hiring automation
software. And the pitch of these AI
companies to HR departments was look,
you're getting hundreds of applications,
maybe a thousand for each open position.
You can't possibly manually review all
of them. So use our AI software and ask
your candidates to record a video of
themselves speaking for like 30 seconds,
not even about their job qualifications,
but about their hobbies or whatever. And
this is from the promotional materials
of an actual company. And the pitch was
that our AI will analyze that video and
uh look at the body language, speech
patterns, things like that in order to
be able to figure out their personality
and their suitability for your
particular job. And you can see here the
software has characterized this person
on multiple dimensions of personality.
That's only one of five tabs. And on the
top right, they have been characterized
as a change agent. And their score is
8.982 digits of precision. That's how
you know it's AI. That's how you know
it's
accurate. And you know, it it didn't
seem to me that there is any known way
by which this could possibly work. And
sure enough, now six years later, none
of these companies have released a shred
of evidence that this can actually
predict someone's job performance. And
uh in the few instances that journalists
have been able to use creative methods
to try to see if these techniques work
or not, here's the kind of thing that
they have found. So here was an
investigative journalist who uploaded a
video, two copies of a video and in one
case they had digitally uh added a
bookshelf in the background and they
also tried changing in another
experiment glasses versus no glasses.
radically different
scores. Right? So I didn't have this
evidence back then but this is what I
suspected and coincidentally at that
time I was given I was invited to give a
talk here and I gave a talk called how
to recognize AI snake oil and I said
look there are many kinds of AI some
things like generative AI which wasn't
called generative AI back then those are
making rapid progress they work well but
there are also claims being made like
this I called it an elaborate random
number generator and uh people seem to
like that talk so I put the slides
online the next day I thought 20 of my
colleagues would look at it. But in
fact, the slides went viral, which I
didn't know was a thing that could
happen with academic work. Uh, and I
realized it wasn't because I had said
something profound, but because we
suspect that a lot of the AI related
claims being made are not necessarily
true, but you know, these are being made
by trillion dollar companies and
supposed geniuses. So, we don't feel
like we necessarily have the confidence
to call it out. And so, when I was able
to say, look, I'm a computer science
professor. I study AI. I build AI and I
can tell you that some of these claims
uh are backed by evidence that seemed to
resonate with a lot of people and within
a couple of days I had like 30 or 40
invitations to turn that talk into an
article or even a book. I really wanted
to write that book but I didn't feel
ready because uh I knew that there was a
lot of research to be done in presenting
a more rigorous framework to understand
when AI works and when it doesn't. And
so that's when Sash Kapoor joined me as
a graduate student. So we did about five
years of research and the book is a
summary and a synthesis of that research
some of which we've also published in
the form of a series of papers leading
up to that. So let me just take the next
15 minutes or so to give you some of the
main ideas from the book. The starting
point of the book is to recognize that
AI is not one single technology. It's an
umbrella term for a set of technologies
that are only loosely related to each
other. This is chat GPT. I don't need to
tell you what it is. But on the other
hand, technology that banks might use in
order to classify someone's credit risk
is also called AI. There's a reason
they're both called AI. They're both
forms of learning from data. But in all
the ways that matter in how the
technology works, what the application
is, uh, and most importantly, how it
might fail, and what the consequences
are, these two things couldn't be more
different from each other. So the thing
on the right is an example of what we
call predictive AI. And what all
predictive AI applications have in
common is a certain logic for
decision-m. It's ways of making
decisions about people, often very
consequential decisions based on a
prediction of what they will do in the
future or what will happen to them in
the future. And that decision is made
using machine learning based on data
from past similar people. So this is
used in hiring and there the logic is
who will do well at a job. It's used in
lending. There the logic is who might
pay back a loan or not. It's used in
criminal justice and there the logic is
who might commit a crime or not commit a
crime. It's used in healthcare. It's
used in education. Everex expanding set
of domains. And predictive AI is
something we're very dubious about and
I'll come back to that in a second. And
then of course there's generative AI. In
addition to generating text, there's an
everexpanding variety of things that it
can do. Uh we also talk a lot in the
book about social media algorithms and
what what are some of the societal scale
risks that can arise out of that as
opposed to discrete risks to to
particular individuals. And we talk a
little bit about self-driving cars and
uh and robotics which I will come back
to in a few minutes. So why are we so
skeptical about predictive AI? If we
look at the criminal justice example,
for instance, in the majority of
jurisdictions today, when someone is
arrested, when the judge faces a
decision, you know, there's months or
maybe years until their trial, should
that person spend that time in jail or
should they be free to go or should
there be an ankle monitor or anyone any
number of options for release? that
decision is made or guided by uh an
algorithmic system, an automated um uh
decision-making system or at least
decision recommendation system. It's a
statistical learning system. You could
call it AI. It's something that falls
under the umbrella of what we call
predictive AI. And the problems with
this have been known for a long time. In
2016, there was this well-known
investigation by ProPublica called
Machine Bias where they did a Freedom of
Information Act request. These companies
are notoriously secretive. They managed
to get a lot of data and they showed
that the false positive rate for the
particular algorithm that they studied
was twice as high for black defendants
as it was for white defendants. And so,
we've known about these problems with
racial bias. But when I looked at that
study, you know, there was one thread in
it that I felt didn't get picked up
nearly enough, which is that the
predictive accuracy of these methods is
not really that high. Um, so if you know
about how accuracy is measured in
machine learning, AU is often used area
under the curve. And the best numbers
that you can get here are less than 70%.
And 50% is random guessing, right? So,
we're making decisions about someone's
uh uh you know, freedom based on
something that's only slightly more
accurate than the flip of a coin. And
the mass majority of people who are
predicted to be at high risk did not in
fact go on to commit another crime. So,
we felt that, you know, how is it
ethical to use this for anybody whether
it's a black defendant or white
defendant uh or anyone else. So that is
one of the main points we make in the
book and also in papers leading up to
that that it's hard to predict the
future and it's not a matter of a
limitation of the technology. We just
don't know who's going to commit a crime
in the future. And so we shouldn't so
easily accept this idea of pre-rime of
you know determining someone's fate
based on a prediction of uh a crime they
will commit in the future as opposed to
a determination of
guilt. Okay. So let's uh talk about
generative AI. There's a lot more to say
about predictive AI, but maybe we can
save that for the conversation and for
the Q&A. Uh, generative AI, of course,
in addition to text, it can generate any
one of a number of things. And we're
look, there are limitations. There's a
lot of hype, and I'll talk about some of
the downsides in in a second, but we're
also very clear in the book that
generative AI is useful to basically
every knowledge worker, anyone who
thinks for a living. uh and uh you know,
I'm sure we'll talk about the labor
implications, but I also wanted to
emphasize for a second that a big aspect
of it is that it's a technology a lot of
the time uh that's just very fun to use.
Uh and I I just wanted to, you know,
keep that in the conversation because
that is often easily forgotten when
we're talking about these serious
aspects of AI. And in my own personal
use of AI, I certainly use it for my
research, but quite a bit in my personal
life as well. I have two young kids and
I often find myself using AI in ways
that really enrich our relationship when
I'm spending time with my kids. Um, so
the other day, for instance, I was
teaching my daughter fractions and it's,
you know, hard for a kid to understand
the idea of fractions. So I pulled out
uh an AI app on my phone and these days
you can produce a little app that's
created on the spot by AI based on a
text description of what you want the
app to do. So, I asked the um uh the AI
agent to create an app to visualize
fractions. And it made uh this little
game. It's it's a little slider and it
generates a random fraction and asks the
child to try to guess where it goes on
the line and once they guess it will uh
check that guess and it will divide the
line into many parts, visualize what 1/3
looks like, give a score and keep score
and you know keep generating new
fractions. So, we played with this for
like 15 minutes, and it really helped
her, and I've done this with all kinds
of things, generating random clock faces
as a way to teach her to tell time, etc.
And what's really cool about this is
that you make this app once, you play
with it. You know, my child's uh doesn't
have a huge attention span. It's useful
for 15 minutes, and then it's done. You
throw it away, right? And that's
amazing. You couldn't have imagined
doing this a couple of years ago because
it would have taken at a minimum several
hours to create an app.
Okay, so with that said, we are also
critical in the book about the
generative AI industry's irresponsible
release practices. And uh there are of
course many harmful consequences of
this. And as we say in the book, it's
like everyone in the world has been
simultaneously given the equivalent of a
free buzzsaw. There are AI generated
books on Amazon by people just trying to
make a buck. Uh in some cases, you know,
it's just an annoyance. Maybe you lost
uh 99 cents, which is often what these
things are sold for because you
unknowingly bought an AI generated book.
But in some cases, there are things like
foraging guides for
mushrooms, right? Generated by AI full
of hallucinations. And so those can have
life ordeath consequences. And there
have been in many cases life ordeath
consequences. People developing
companionships with their AI bots and
that bots encouraging their suicidal
tendencies and that sort of thing. Uh
and the biggest one in our mind is these
AI notification apps which you've
probably heard about. It's been an
epidemic in so many countries around the
world especially in high schools. And
this is uh these are apps that can take
a picture of a person and uh create uh a
nude image of that person based on uh
based on the photo that you upload. uh
and this has affected hundreds of
thousands of obviously primarily women
around the world and not only AI
companies but also policy makers being
so slow to recognize this problem and
doing something about it has been a real
shame since 2019 since long before the
latest wave of generative AI
advancements we've had evidence this is
a problem that's happening on a massive
scale so when we talk about AI and labor
one very clear thing that we need to
talk about is the labor that goes into
making these large scale uh generative
AI models. Yes, they're trained on data
from the internet, but they're also uh
post-trained as it's called based on
human interaction and there is a lot of
human annotation work that is uh
necessary to essentially clean the
training data if you will that goes into
making these models and this work is
offshored to uh developing countries.
It's trauma-inducing work because day in
and day out you have to look at you know
videos of beheadings or racist diet
tribes or whatever and make sure that
doesn't get into the input or output of
AI and the working conditions are so
precarious that a lot of these AI
companies have often turned to people
who don't have a lot of options in the
labor market like refugees or people in
countries experiencing hyperinflation or
uh prison labor and so forth. So
something is clearly wrong here and we
need new labor labor rights for
this. So having been critical of
companies I do want to say that it's not
about putting all of the blame on the
companies. There's a lot of uh personal
agency that all of us need to exercise
and we need to use judgment in in
knowing when the use of AI is even
appropriate which is separate from the
issue of whether it works or not. A good
example of this comes from the recent
election. This example is not in our
book because it's uh it's pretty recent.
But there was a candidate in Wyoming,
Cheyenne Wyoming, who wanted the mayor
to be an AI chatbot. And he said if that
if he were elected, all the decisions
would be made using uh this uh chatbot.
As far as I can tell, it was only chat
GPT behind the scenes, but he called it
VIC for virtual integrated citizen,
which certainly sounds more
sophisticated.
And uh yeah, I learned about this
because the Washington Post called me to
ask, "What are the risks of having an AI
mayor?" I I was very confused by that
question. I kind of blurted out, "What
do you mean risks of having an AI
mayor?" It's like asking, "What are the
risks of replacing a car with a
cardboard cutout of a car?" I mean,
sure, it looks like a car, but the risk
is that you don't have a car anymore.
Um, I regretted it as soon as I said it.
It was a little bit snarky, but the post
printed it anyway. Um, so, so let me
explain what I mean. I mean, so his
point was that politics is very messy,
inefficient,
uh, you know, a lot of fighting, etc.
Uh, let's make it more efficient with
chatbots. But that completely misses the
point. The reason politics is messy is
that that's the forum we've chosen for
resolving our deepest disputes. And to
try to automate that is uh to miss the
very
point. So this is um more or less the
one of the last things I want to say.
I'm going to wrap up in a few minutes.
But this is kind of the framework we use
in the book for thinking about how we
should look at any particular AI
application. It's a two-dimensional
figure. On one dimension, you have how
well does it work? It does it work as as
claimed or is it overhyped or does it
not work at all? And is it is it a kind
of snake oil? But on the other
dimension, we have the fact
that, you know, AI can be harmful
because it doesn't work as claimed in
its snake oil or it can actually be
harmful because it works well uh and it
works exactly as claimed. So, let me
give you examples of each of those kinds
of things. So, let's start with the top
right here. I mentioned those video
interviews. Uh I mentioned criminal risk
prediction. Cheating detection is of
course when uh professors suspect that
students are using AI, they might turn
to these cheating detection tools, but
they just don't work. At least as of
today, they're more likely to flag
non-native English speakers. And I've
heard so many horror stories of students
being falsely accused. Uh as things
stand today, that very much feels like
snake oil to me. But on the bottom right
though are things like mass surveillance
using facial recognition. Historically,
facial recognition hasn't worked that
well, but now it works really, really
well. And that in fact is part of the
reason that it's harmful if it's used
without the right guardrails and civil
liberties and so forth. Then we talk
about content moderation, which uh we
explain in what way it's overhyped, but
basically our interest in the book is
everything except the bottom left. Um
those are applications, simple things
for instance like autocomplete that kind
of fade into the background and really
work well. uh and um you know our our
goal is to have an intervention so we
can equip people to push back against AI
that is problematic. You wouldn't want
to read a book that is 300 pages on the
virtues of
autocomplete. And I say that because I
think that bottom left corner is very
important. There's more in that corner
than we might suspect. And to explain
that, let me give you a funny definition
of what AI is. And this definition says
AI is whatever hasn't been done yet.
AI is whatever hasn't been done yet. So,
what does that mean? What it means is
that when a technology is new, when its
effects are double-edged, when it
doesn't work that well, that's when
we're more likely to call it AI. When it
starts working well, it's reliable, it
kind of fades into the background. We
take it for granted. We don't call it AI
anymore. And this has happened over and
over with many kinds of automation with,
you know, Roomba and other robotic
vacuum cleaners. I mentioned
autocomplete, handwriting recognition,
speech recognition, which I'm sure many
of us uh use on a daily basis to
transcribe. Uh even spellch check was at
one point a cutting edge example of AI.
So this is the kind of AI we want more
of. We want technology that's reliable,
that does one thing, does it well, and
kind of fades into the background. So
that's uh uh something that we hope that
our critical approach can can nudge uh
the industry towards. And our prediction
is and our kind of optimistic prediction
about AI is that one day much of what we
call AI today will fade into the
background but certainly not all of it.
So for instance, not criminal risk
scoring there. There are intrinsic
normative questions that won't go away
with, you know, making the technology
more reliable, but with self-driving
cars, although they are in the news
today often for the wrong reasons
because of accidents and so forth, it is
going to be the case that those are, you
know, solvable engineering problems,
there has already been dramatic progress
in solving them. And one day these
things are going to be widely used. Uh
they're going to become part of our
physical infrastructure. We'll take them
for granted and the word car one day
will just mean self-driving car, right?
And we're going to need a new name for
what we call cars today, like maybe
manual car or something. And there are
some downsides there. We have to think
about the labor implications of, you
know, gig workers and so forth. But
ultimately, it will have been a good
thing because uh there are 1 million
deaths from auto accidents every year.
So again, that's our vision for a
positive kind of AI.
So broadly speaking in terms of what I
think we need to change uh you know in
terms of shaping AI for the better there
are many different recommendations in
the book but I would cluster them into
three big areas. One is we need to know
which applications are just inherently
harmful or overhyped and we probably
should not even deploy. And secondly,
even when we uh even when it does make
sense to deploy an AI application, there
are often so many risks and we need
guard rails for those. And the third one
is more structural. It's really about
the uh the um fact that AI is
exacerbating some of the inherent uh
capitalistic uh inequalities that we see
in our society. So how do we uh limit
companies power and redistribute AI
benefits? Let me take one last minute to
tell you about uh a paper that we
released just a couple of days ago which
is a follow-up to AI snake oil. AI snake
oil looks at what's going wrong with AI
today and how do we fix it. Our new
paper it's called AI as normal
technology and it's kind of a vision for
AI over the next maybe 20 years. It's
taking a longer term look and it's
trying to give a framework for thinking
about AI that's an alternative to the
major narratives that we have today.
There are three major narratives about
AI today. The first one is that it's
super intelligence that will usher in a
utopia. The second one is closely
related. It's a super intelligence but
it will doom us rather than benefit us.
And the third one is that we should be
very skeptical about AI. It's just a
fat. It's so overhyped. it's going to
pass very soon. And uh you know our our
approach in AI snake oil is is a middle
ground. It doesn't fit into one of these
narratives. But these three narratives
are so compelling that we're often
thought of as uh saying that AI is a fat
that's soon going to pass. That's not
what we're saying. But especially in the
new paper, we're making that very
concrete. We're giving a fourth
alternative way to think about AI. And
this is closely modeled on what we know
from past technological revolutions like
the industrial revolution, like
electricity, uh like the internet. We do
think AI is going to have transformative
effects, but we think they're going to
unfold over a period of many decades as
opposed to suddenly. It's going to have
both good and bad effects. We um uh we
think a lot of the super intelligence
and catastrophic risks have been greatly
exaggerated. We think that uh we're
already in a good place to know how to
address some of those risks if they do
come up and on the basis of all of this
we have uh some policy ideas for
steering and shaping AI in a more
positive direction. So I'll stop here
and I really look forward to the
conversation. Thank you so
[Applause]
much. Move this way.
These are fancy chairs. Yeah, as long as
I don't fall off them.
All right, that's fantastic. Arvin,
thank you for
uh you know giving a very very succinct
but very effective summary of the book.
So I want to start from the predictive
AI part. So I think that was one of the
uh items in the book that I thought was
super interesting and super revealing.
But I want I want to dig a little bit
deeper and
uh understand
where the more foundational concerns
about predictive AI are coming from. And
I guess as an economist uh you know
perhaps a uh one place one could start
is by distinguishing one person decision
problems or one person interaction
problems versus social problems in which
there are there is an interaction.
So, so if you look for example build an
AI tool for a runner to decide when say
for example she's going
to need more liquids or when she's had
enough with the running or something
like that. That's a sort of a predictive
tool but it doesn't have this social
interaction aspect. Still has the human
agency. So you might say well human
agency means we can never predict
anything. But I think I'm not sure
whether you want to go there or is it
more these in these game theoretic
situations where uh you know what I do
will depend on what others will do.
there are these complex interactions
that we don't understand and and I guess
if if this if it's the latter is there a
way to for example cut some of the more
complex things into smaller pieces and
make some progress like for example I
don't see sendle uh here but uh you know
send's very interesting work on you know
bail you know could we that's a social
problem but could we reduce it with the
right guard rails to like a decision
problem for a judge
My guess is it's not going to be easy,
but perhaps. So those that's Yeah, thank
you. That's a fantastic question. And
yes, uh Sandil and others have a great
paper prediction policy problems that
lays out their vision for how to use
what we call predictive AI for various
things such as bail and other things. Uh
and and I was mentioning that our work
is based on some papers we've written.
The main one on this uh particular
question is called against predictive
optimization which is sort of intended
as a counterpoint specifically to the
prediction policy problems paper. And to
your point exactly that if we were using
AI to predict for a runner, you know,
when they might need fluids or whatever,
certainly doesn't raise these concerns
at all. Yes, it is something about the
social nature of it. Specifically, it's
about the fact that an entity with power
is exercising that power over an
individual, right? And there I think we
need to go beyond concerns of accuracy
and economic efficiency and so forth and
ask from a philosophical perspective
when is this exercise of power
justified. So in our paper we actually
did engage with uh with philosophers a
little bit. We uh read that literature
and tried to connect it with these more
concrete AI questions. So while we do
say that the accuracy is very poor, you
know, how can we do this when it's only
slightly better than the flip of a coin,
even if the accuracy was much better at
a fundamental normative level, we do
think uh again, you know, don't want to
go into too much detail for reasons we
talk about in the paper, when it's this
that when the relationship is that of
exercising power over someone, there are
more considerations that come into play.
I think that's a very important point
that you know many of these things you
know I think the the statement that
technology is never neutral that's like
now part of the folklore but it's it's
it's it's not it's not that it's
neutral you know new technologies really
change the power balance especially with
large corporations which is I guess is a
good segue to my second question which
is generative AI. So I I thought the
generative AI discussion was very
interesting as well. So sort of one take
which I think is sort of close to my
view is you know there are a lot of very
exciting capabilities of generative AI
but there aren't that many applications
that and I think uh I don't see pretty
much any applications except in a very
few areas like a programming sub
routines etc which is really going to
change yet the production
structure you know I think that's that's
not exactly the way you put it but I
think it's similar to so is there a
fundamental reason for that or is this
just a passing
phase? Yeah. So I completely agree with
you that that's the state of things
right now. Where we might disagree maybe
a little bit is that I'm not so sure
it's fundamental. I think it can uh
change in the future and it's already
changing now. Uh and let me explain what
I mean and this is a big part of what we
get into in the AI as normal technology
paper. it when when Chad GPT came out,
the uh the fact that it was so general
purpose that you could make it do
different tasks simply by changing the
prompt really misled I think not just a
lot of users but also the companies
themselves from talking to many
developers in the AI industry into
thinking that this was a new paradigm of
software development that this had
obiated the need for building you know
software to do specific things for you
software in the legal sector or software
for uh helping you with your writing or
whatever it is, then you can use these
general purpose models and going forward
all that was going to be needed is
prompting. And that approach, it was
tried for a year or two and has
miserably failed. And we analyze in our
newsletter for instance we have a AI
snake oil newsletter where we use the um
foundational approach in the book to
analyze ongoing developments. Why many
products that were simple wrappers
around large language models and tried
to actually get them to do useful things
in the real world instead of simply
spitting out text. Those have been
pretty bad failures. So there was a
device called the rabbit. Do folks
remember this? And then there was a
Marcus Brownley review saying it was the
worst thing it ever reviewed. And there
was a big little bit of a scandal about
that. and so forth. So that is exactly
an example of what you pointed out which
is that the capability is there. These
large language model based agents are
capable of doing very interesting things
like navigating a website doing shopping
for you. But the thing is because they
haven't developed products around them
and gotten the reliability rate up from
let's say like 80% where it is now all
the way to 99.99% which is something we
expect any software product to have. Um
these are pretty much dead on arrival.
people are complaining that it ordered
their product the wrong address, right?
Would you use a product a second time if
it if it did that? So, that's an example
of where companies have dropped the ball
in translating those capabilities into
products. They are changing their
approach now. I think there is a very
good chance that we're going to see a
mushrooming of products in the in the
few years coming. No, I I definitely
didn't mean to suggest that it was
fundamental, but but I think it's uh I'm
also not convinced it's going to go away
very quickly. I guess one reason which
is different from the ones that you've
articulated so let me try that on you is
you know every job is a very complex
bundle of tasks
and you know the way that we've done
automation in the past is that we've
done careful or semi-careful division of
labor so that certain tasks can be
separated uh other complimentary tasks
can be performed by humans or
organizations can be changed it requires
a lot of specific knowledge for the
occupation for the industry a lot of
tacid
knowledge and I think the approach of
the uh leading AI companies has been
well we're going to go to AGI or very
close to AGI everything can be done so
we don't need any of this tested
knowledge so we're just going to throw
these foundation models and they're
going to do it and I think that's never
going to work because even with the very
fast advances in foundation models a
foundation model is not going to be able
to do everything that even like a a an
auditor does and when you go to an
educator or to a health professional I
think it's it's very unlikely. So so you
really need this tacid very specific
domain knowledge so I don't see that
path being followed yet. 100% agree. I
think this is another area where uh AI
developers really fooled themselves. I
think there was misleading intuition
from the last few years of rapid AI
progress where by scaling up these
models and by training them on bigger
and bigger chunks of the internet there
were more and more emergent capabilities
that approach has run out and not only
because they're already training on all
of the data they can get their hands on
but also because the new things that are
left for these models to learn are
exactly uh things like tacet knowledge.
There is a way to learn tacet knowledge
but it is not in the passive way that
models are being trained right now. It
is by actually deploying models or AI
systems uh even relatively unreliable AI
systems in small settings in different
domains on a sector by sector basis not
in a general purpose way and learning
from those interactions with real users
and real domain experts. This is the
kind of positive feedback loop that
we've had for instance with self-driving
cars. The reason that it took about two
decades from the first demonstrations of
successful self-driving to getting them
to a place where they're able to
autonomously ferry people on the roads
right now is that you have to slowly
scale up. You drive a,000 miles and then
you collect data that allows you to
improve your reliability. Now it's
reliable enough to drive 10,000 miles
and then you go to 100,000 etc. That's a
very slow process. We predict that we're
going to see that kind of slow feedback
loop going forward on a sectorby sector
basis. Okay. Okay. Well, I think that's
a segue for the next question, which I
wasn't sure whether I was going to ask
because you you wisely stay away from
AGI a lot in the book. But I mean, I
guess here is the sort of the argument
that many people have in their minds
which makes something like AGI a default
position. You know, at the end, the
human mind is a computer. uh whatever
substrates it uses, it's the computing
machine of sorts. Well, we're going to
build better and better computing
machines, so therefore we'll go to AGI.
So, I think then any, you know, I think
this is a sort of a bait and switch.
Then it rather puts anybody that says,
well, I showed show me the money in a
defensive position. But if we were in
that defensive position, either we would
have to disagree with that scenario, or
we would have to say, well, here are the
bottlenecks that you haven't taken into
account. And I I would be curious to
know whether you would completely avoid
being put in that position or you you
have something to say about the
presumption or the bottleneck. Yeah. No,
I'm more than happy to talk about it and
these are certainly some of our more
controversial views at least within the
tech community. Not here. Yeah. Um so
let me say two things to this one. Uh
this has been consistently predicted
throughout the history of AI for more
than 70 years. When when they first made
these uh what are called universal
computers. We just call them computers
now. But back then they were called
universal computers because it was a
very new concept that you could build
one piece of hardware to do any task by
programming it appropriately as opposed
to building special purpose hardware for
each particular task. The excitement
around that was exactly similar to the
excitement around general purpose uh you
know generative AI models today. They
thought we've done the hard part, the
hardware. It's right there in the name.
And now we just need to build a software
to emulate the human mind. And they
thought that that was only a couple of
years away. The uh pioneering 1956
Dartmouth conference, they proposed a
quote unquote two-month 10-man effort to
uh to, you know, to to make very
substantial progress towards uh AGI,
which was just called AI back then.
Right? So over and over, while it might
be possible in principle that we can
have software do all the things the
human mind does, AI developers have been
so off in knowing how much the gap is
between where things currently are and
where uh where we need to be. So that's
one thing. The second thing, I know
we're running out of time, so let me
just very quickly say is uh we talk
about this in the book in chapter 5. Um,
in our view, human intelligence is not
primarily a consequence of our biology,
but rather our technology. The fact that
we've been using our technology for, you
know, decades, for centuries to learn
more about the world. The most prized
knowledge that we have that allows us to
do things that we most associate with
intelligence, you know, whether it's
medical testing or or or economic
policy. These are things that we learned
by doing large-scale experiments on
people. So we predict that very soon
these computational limits are not going
to matter. But the thing that is going
to hold AGI back is not being able to
easily transcend learning this knowledge
from what humans have actually learned
already and creating new knowledge for
itself because that's going to require
the same kind of bottlenecks that we
ourselves have faced with experiments,
scaling, ethics and so forth. And we're
not going to let AI do experiments on
millions of us without any oversight.
And so that is going to put very very
strong speed limits. Great. That's
that's an excellent point. I think we're
running out of time. So I want to bring
it to I think to a topic that's actually
much closer to our initiative which is
you know our concerns
about whether we're doing the right kind
of AI. So I think uh David, Simon and
I all three of us have
these ideas some based on intuition some
based on empirical facts some based on
history
that you know there is a more productive
way in which you can develop AI
especially what we call proworker AI
which uh aims at increasing worker
skills expertise productivity create new
more new tasks or capabilities to do
more sophisticated tasks and then we're
worried whether we'll actually ever get
there on the current path and I guess
you have sort of very
nicely cataloged various mistakes that
people are making in terms of banking or
at least pretending that they're banking
on AI that's unlikely to work or if it
works it's not going to be that great.
AI hype perhaps that's leading to AI
overinvestment. Perhaps it's reading to
the the wrong kind of AI investment, but
I guess at least I I I didn't see it or
perhaps I missed it. That next step in
the book, which is
therefore the wrong types
of innovation, effort, R&D, etc. is
being made, the wrong kind of startup
energy is coming and whether we can do
anything about that other than of course
inform the public, inform policy makers
with books and conversations like this.
But is there is there a more sort of an
agenda of that of that sort that would
make you even more of a fellow with us?
I think there there is a little bit and
I think that's exactly the critical
question and I'm so glad that you all
are looking into that and I think it
needs um perhaps economists more than
computer scientists. But what I can say
from a computer science perspective is
that when we look at what companies are
doing there is just right now there's
not the market is not rewarding that. Uh
so an example of where this plays out is
the use of AI by students. I know we're
talking about labor, but I think it's
it's somewhat similar. So the initial
uses of generative AI were primarily for
uh you know cheating or or other things
that uh are maybe not the best ways to
use them. We know there are good ways to
use them. We know that AI if properly
configured can be a very good tutor
despite its limitations such as
hallucinations. I use AI very heavily
for learning. I haven't stopped using
books, but there are some advantages of
uh of using AI. Happy to get into that
in the Q&A. But it's remarkable that
only I think a couple weeks or maybe a
month ago that Anthropic came up with an
AI tutor, which is just a simple
customization of their model to to be in
a tutoring mode where it's not just
giving out answers to the student, but
rather promoting their critical
thinking, right? And it's striking to me
that that took them so little work, but
it took them, you know, two and a half
years or whatever of people just
constantly complaining in order to do,
right? And so uh yes we can provide lots
of technical ideas but ultimately we
need to either change the incentives for
companies through regulation or have
much more investment in other
organizations maybe NOS's who are going
to develop these AI applications with
the public interest in mind instead of
leaving it to the AI companies. Thank
you very much Arvin. I think that's a
that's a great time for us to transition
because I'm sure many people have
burning questions for you. Uh the way
we're going to organize this is there
are two mics over there. Those of you
who want to ask questions uh if you
don't mind lining up and then we can
take one from each side in in
alternating
order. Why don't we start on the right?
Uh thank you very much a wonderful talk.
uh you know I just ask a quick layman
questions as a user you know for AI for
over a year you know uh my question is
that how much you can tolerate the error
they generate from AI you know giving
you the answer for instance recently I
you know try to ask AI
uh a question of a citation or quotation
from a famous person okay and then I get
an answer and then I post on my blog and
I get embarrassing because uh I asked
the professor uh he said that I never
say such statement so that AI to create
or imagine you know that person X you
know say something like this you know I
would say that you know AI give you a
lot of convenience
uh pattern recognition and very
convenient but I would say 10% of or
more you know they give you some mix
with your you know correct answer. Thank
you. Yes, hallucinations are a big
problem with generative AI. These are
fundamentally stochastic technologies.
Even if we could somehow clean all the
training data and make sure that you
only train it on true statements, the
problem would remain because at
generation time it is kind of remixing
the statistical patterns in its training
data. The hallucination rates have gone
down quite a bit over the last couple of
years, but they're not zero. I don't
think they're going to reach zero in a
very short period of time. And I have
also had the experience of people
emailing me to ask for my papers and
they're like, "Hey, where is it? I
couldn't find it online." Turns out it
was made up by AI and attributed to me.
And so what what we uh train people to
do is is to
identify in your work, but identify
specific areas of your workflow. And in
each of those um uh uses of AI, you have
to have an answer to why is it easier to
verify the answer to this question than
to have done this work myself in the
first place. And if you don't have an
answer to that, don't use AI. And if you
do have an answer, it might save you
time or you know enhance your creativity
as the case may be. Thank you. Thank
you. Um, professor I wanted to bring
back again this topic of the uh fairness
or maybe bias of the algorithms about 6
months or a year ago Sam Alman came and
when someone asked him about the the
bias of the algorithms you can say that
for example in the criminal justice
system he said that it's easier to to
change the algorithm than the bias from
the humans and I said like okay maybe
that's compelling to be honest for me I
was like, "Okay, understandable. What do
you say about that? What what do you
think it's it's possible? Do you think
it's better? Who who says what uh what
the bias is or Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
It's it's a good debate. Uh Sandil has
also made that claim. He had an op-ed in
the New York Times literally saying it's
easier to fix biased algorithms than
biased humans." And I very much see that
point of view. Um I have a slightly
different view. I think in theory it's
certainly possible to fix certain kinds
of biases in algorithms. uh it might
just be a matter of changing you know a
parameter in the code and there are many
computer science techniques to to do
that. The problem is not technical. The
problem is one of uh incentives and uh
uh transparency and things like that. A
lot of the time you don't have
transparency from the companies who are
building these criminal justice
algorithms. They might say it's
proprietary, it's a trade secret. So in
the case of compass even though it's
been about a decade since that
investigation no changes have been made
because actually you cannot fix it
without introducing disperate treatment.
If you were to fix it in the algorithm
you have to have different weights uh or
uh you know different uh treatments uh
different thresholds for different
categories of people and that actually
would violate the law. And these are
things that human judges account for in
a very subtle way when they're making
their decisions. But when we're trying
to do them in algorithmic systems, we
have to do them in very crude ways which
even if theoretically possible, end up
not being practically possible because
of various constraints. Thank you.
Hi, thank you for the book and the
conversation. Um so the question I
wanted to ask kind of in the in the book
and in the talk right there's this kind
of general statement that it's like many
predictive AI applications are unlikely
to work and there's hope for Gen AI and
I want to ask basically is that
predominantly a statement about from
your perspective the underlying
technologies or the settings in which
those technologies are employed. The
reason I asked that is because you know
there are certain like I work on AI for
climate change related applications
right the kind of there are certain
settings like solar power prediction
where you could use a predictive model
or a generative model and also there are
kind of some tides from some of the
large technology providers now where
there's this statement of like we should
invest in generative AI and large models
because it's going to solve climate
problems and that leads to an investment
in genai rather than other techniques
and all of the sort of energy
consumption and concentration of power
that comes with that and and sort of the
the statement of like gen AI is better
than predictive AI can kind of lead to
those kinds of tides. So yeah, circling
back is a statement about the
technologies or the settings really.
Yeah, thank you. That's a great
question. Uh and it's exactly the
latter. It's a statement about the
settings. It's about the particular
applications that we're uh using these
technologies for. Even if you were to
take a generative AI model and use it in
criminal justice, exactly the same list
of our objections would apply and they
don't apply in the in the solar power
prediction setting, right? Because
you're not making consequential
decisions about people that have massive
ethical consequences. So yeah, I'm I'm
totally with where you're coming from
with that question. Thanks. Please. Uh
you said something about the predictions
from people in the field about how soon
AI would reach certain levels has been
has terrible track record. Uh, let me
suggest that's a sample bias because all
the bad predictions get all the press.
You never hear about the fact that
somebody once asked John McCarthy how
long what it would take to get really
good artificial intelligence and he was
annoyed by the question. So he gave a
somewhat whimsical answer but he said
1.3 Einstein's and and he went on from
there. That's not widely quoted because
it's not nearly the kind of thing you
can make a big laugh out of. So let me
caution you on that. Thank you. I
appreciate that. I should clarify, you
know, I had a somewhat uh superficial uh
presentation of that point when I said
it just now, but there's a deeper point
behind it, which is not so much that the
founders were wrong, but they were wrong
for fundamental structural reasons in
that they were I'm not blaming them.
They were not able to see what are the
kind of steps in the ladder, if you
will. We use the uh metaphor of a ladder
in our book to discuss uh progress uh in
AI. when you're standing on one step of
the ladder, we claim it's impossible to
know what the future steps on the ladder
are. So, it's really about that deeper
point. But, thank you. I appreciate the
correction. And one other quick point.
Um, you got what I'll call an
inexpensive laugh out of the idea that
the uh predictive programs and their AU
was only about 70. So, they weren't much
better than flipping a coin. You have to
ask about the baseline. How good were
the people doing this task? Because if
the people doing this task are at 55%
then 70 is pretty damn good. Yeah.
I
Okay. All right. So, uh the the people
were exactly at the same level of the as
the algorithm and not even trained
judges, just lay people. And not only
that, whatever you can accomplish with
state-of-the-art algorithms, you can get
with a two variable regression model.
And those two variables are the
defendants's uh age and the number of
prior arrests. And we talk about why the
use of the uh age is actually uh morally
problematic. So essentially the logic
behind these systems is if you've been
arrested a lot in the past, you're going
to be arrested a lot in the future. That
is the entire thing. And we actually say
that we would actually be much happier
with a system where that was the
hard-coded logic because it would be
apparent to everybody, especially the
defendant, uh what is actually going on.
So I I'm with you that we have to look
at the right baseline, but here we have
a 40-page paper looking at the right
baseline and it doesn't look good for
the algorithm. Maybe I'll go to another
question. Yeah, we have we have only
less than 3 minutes left, so please very
short questions at this point. I had a
question about how you calibrate
investment across different types of
technologies. So maybe you have one type
of technology that with some very small
probability will cause a big return and
something that is likely to work but
will not like change the world. So how
do you think about allocating investment
between these different technologies?
Yeah, definitely. So, uh this relates to
an issue that we call hurting in the AI
community and in every research
community. You know, there are
fashionable ideas, people cluster around
them. It's it's hard to compare this
between fields, but just kind of based
on vibes, it seems like there is more of
this going on in the AI community than
in most other research communities. So
today all of these fancy generative AI
systems are based on neural networks
which were sidelined for more than 20
years because people thought that they
were completely outperformed by by
another technology called support vector
machines which you know people would
laugh at in today's context right so why
did that happen there wasn't enough
diverse exploration of different paths
so uh I do think you know it might be
hard to compute the return on investment
but it seems clear that there needs to
be more of a risk preference if you will
and and diversifying the set of research
ideas we invest into.
Please. Yeah. Since the 1980s, I think
we've seen an everinccreasing gap
between productivity and wages. I think
there's a big argument for the
stagnation of wages um basically um just
occurring uh probably due to a number of
factors but including computation um
kind of replacing and abstracting a lot
of the work. How do you view maybe the
impacts of something like AI maybe um
impacting the productivity of a worker
um and how that might also affect the
wages and how can we correct that?
That's a question for you, I think.
But I don't want to hear from me. You
want to hear from you? No, no, no, no.
Please go ahead. I want to hear from
you.
Well, this is what we were uh we spend
all our a good chunk of our waking hours
that uh not just automating work which
will of course happen and should happen
but also finding AI uses that will
increase the information and the
capabilities of workers to deal with
more complex things. But how to get
there is the real challenge.
Oh, one last question. Oh, yay. Thank
you so much. Um, I just wanted to ask I
think I've seen lately in the public
there is a lot of fear and backlash
against AI and I wanted to know your
thoughts on what might be contributing
to that and also what people uh how
people in either tech research or tech
industries how they can address those
fears. Definitely lots of thoughts on
this but I know we're running out of
time so let me keep it short and yes
you're absolutely right. uh many more
people according to public opinion
surveys are uh worried about what AI
will mean for them than are excited
about it. And I think this is almost
entirely uh a statement about capitalism
than it is about AI. It varies a lot
between different countries based on you
know the kinds of worker protections
that people have come to expect etc. It
uh dramatically moderates their their
reaction to these exciting slashw
worrying technological developments. uh
and I I think in terms of what can be
done about it, I I think there's a lot
of room to improve the channels of
communication between the AI industry
and research community uh with the
general public. Um we've talked a lot
about how in many ways people in
general, workers in different domains
have a much better understanding of AI's
potential and limits and their
particular application like law or
medicine or whatever than AI developers
do. And so AI developers would benefit a
lot from uh understanding that and not
making these overhyped claims. But at
the same time uh I think people deserve
to understand why is it that companies
are confident enough to make these
trillion dollar bets uh understand uh
you know new emerging capabilities which
frankly almost feels like a a full-time
job to to kind of stay on top of. I
think companies can do a lot to ease
actual public understanding as opposed
to just hyping up capabilities. So I
think communication could improve in
both directions. Thank you so much. Well
thank you very much Arwin. That was
wonderful.
I I'm just going to add that, you know,
it's a testament to how interested
people are. They could have stayed here
for another half an hour, but thank you.
[Applause]